"The Family Code Of The Philippines :
Titles I, II, VI, VII, VII, X, XI, XII

July 6, 1987

I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue
of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order
and promulgate the Family Code of the Philippines, as follows:

TITLE I

MARRIAGE

Chapter 1. Requisites of Marriage

Article 1. Marriage is a special contract of permanent union
between a man and a woman entered into in accordance with
law for the establishment of conjugal and family life. It is the
foundation of the family and an inviolable social institution
whose nature, consequences, and incidents are governed by law
and not subject to stipulation, except that marriage settlements
may fix the property relations during the marriage within the
limits provided by this Code. (52a)

Art. 2. No marriage shall be valid, unless these essential
requisites are present:
(1) Legal capacity of the contracting parties who must be a male
and a female; and
(2) Consent freely given in the presence of the solemnizing
officer. (53a)

Art. 3. The formal requisites of marriage are:
(1) Authority of the solemnizing officer;
(2) A valid marriage license except in the cases provided for in
Chapter 2 of this Title; and
(3) A marriage ceremony which takes place with the appearance
of the contracting parties before the solemnizing officer and their
personal declaration that they take each other as husband and
wife in the presence of not less than two witnesses of legal age.
(53a, 55a)

Art. 4. The absence of any of the essential or formal requisites
shall render the marriage void ab initio, except as stated in
Article 35 (2).
A defect in any of the essential requisites shall not affect the
validity of the marriage but the party or parties responsible for
the irregularity shall be civilly, criminally and administratively
liable. (n)

Art. 5. Any male or female of the age of eighteen years or
upwards not under any of the impediments mentioned in Articles
37 and 38, may contract marriage. (54a)

Art. 6. No prescribed form or religious rite for the solemnization
of the marriage is required. It shall be necessary, however, for
the contracting parties to appear personally before the
solemnizing officer and declare in the presence of not less than
two witnesses of legal age that they take each other as husband
and wife. This declaration shall be contained in the marriage
certificate which shall be signed by the contracting parties and
their witnesses and attested by the solemnizing officer.

In case of a marriage in articulo mortis, when the party at the
point of death is unable to sign the marriage certificate, it shall
be sufficient for one of the witnesses to the marriage to write
the name of said party, which fact shall be attested by the
solemnizing officer. (55a)

Art. 7. Marriage may be solemnized by:
(1) Any incumbent member of the judiciary within the court's
jurisdiction;
(2) Any priest, rabbi, imam, or minister of any church or
religious sect duly authorized by his church or religious sect and
registered with the civil registrar general, acting within the limits
of the written authority granted by his church or religious sect
and provided that at least one of the contracting parties belongs
to the solemnizing officer's church or religious sect;
(3) Any ship captain or airplane chief only in the case mentioned
in Article 31;
 (4) Any military commander of a unit to which a chaplain is
assigned, in the absence of the latter, during a military
operation, likewise only in the cases mentioned in Article 32;
(5) Any consul-general, consul or vice-consul in the case
provided in Article 10. (56a)

Article. 8. The marriage shall be solemnized publicly in the
chambers of the judge or in open court, in the church, chapel or
temple, or in the office the consul-general, consul or vice-consul,
as the case may be, and not elsewhere, except in cases of
marriages contracted on the point of death or in remote places
in accordance with Article 29 of this Code, or where both of the
parties request the solemnizing officer in writing in which case
the marriage may be solemnized at a house or place designated
by them in a sworn statement to that effect. (57a)

Art. 9. A marriage license shall be issued by the local civil
registrar of the city or municipality where either contracting
party habitually resides, except in marriages where no license is
required in accordance with Chapter 2 of this Title. (58a)

Art. 10. Marriages between Filipino citizens abroad may be
solemnized by a consul-general, consul or vice-consul of the
Republic of the Philippines. The issuance of the marriage license
and the duties of the local civil registrar and of the solemnizing
officer with regard to the celebration of marriage shall be
performed by said consular official. (75a)

Art. 11. Where a marriage license is required, each of the
contracting parties shall file separately a sworn application for
such license with the proper local civil registrar which shall
specify the following:
(1) Full name of the contracting party;
(2) Place of birth;
(3) Age and date of birth;
(4) Civil status;
(5) If previously married, how, when and where the previous
marriage was dissolved or annulled;
(6) Present residence and citizenship;
(7) Degree of relationship of the contracting parties;
(8) Full name, residence and citizenship of the father;
(9) Full name, residence and citizenship of the mother; and
(10) Full name, residence and citizenship of the guardian or
person having charge, in case the contracting party has neither
father nor mother and is under the age of twenty-one years.

The applicants, their parents or guardians shall not be required
to exhibit their residence certificates in any formality in
connection with the securing of the marriage license. (59a)
Art. 12. The local civil registrar, upon receiving such application,
shall require the presentation of the original birth certificates or,
in default thereof, the baptismal certificates of the contracting
parties or copies of such documents duly attested by the persons
having custody of the originals. These certificates or certified
copies of the documents by this Article need not be sworn to and
shall be exempt from the documentary stamp tax. The signature
and official title of the person issuing the certificate shall be
sufficient proof of its authenticity.
If either of the contracting parties is unable to produce his birth
or baptismal certificate or a certified copy of either because of
the destruction or loss of the original or if it is shown by an
affidavit of such party or of any other person that such birth or
baptismal certificate has not yet been received though the same
has been required of the person having custody thereof at least
fifteen days prior to the date of the application, such party may
furnish in lieu thereof his current residence certificate or an
instrument drawn up and sworn to before the local civil registrar
concerned or any public official authorized to administer oaths.
Such instrument shall contain the sworn declaration of two
witnesses of lawful age, setting forth the full name, residence
and citizenship of such contracting party and of his or her
parents, if known, and the place and date of birth of such party.
The nearest of kin of the contracting parties shall be preferred as
witnesses, or, in their default, persons of good reputation in the
province or the locality.

The presentation of birth or baptismal certificate shall not be
required if the parents of the contracting parties appear
personally before the local civil registrar concerned and swear to
the correctness of the lawful age of said parties, as stated in the
application, or when the local civil registrar shall, by merely
looking at the applicants upon their personally appearing before
him, be convinced that either or both of them have the required
age. (60a)

Art. 13. In case either of the contracting parties has been
previously married, the applicant shall be required to furnish,
instead of the birth or baptismal certificate required in the last
preceding article, the death certificate of the deceased spouse or
the judicial decree of the absolute divorce, or the judicial decree
of annulment or declaration of nullity of his or her previous
marriage.
In case the death certificate cannot be secured, the party shall
make an affidavit setting forth this circumstance and his or her
actual civil status and the name and date of death of the
deceased spouse. (61a)

Art. 14. In case either or both of the contracting parties, not
having been emancipated by a previous marriage, are between
the ages of eighteen and twenty-one, they shall, in addition to
the requirements of the preceding articles, exhibit to the local
civil registrar, the consent to their marriage of their father,
mother, surviving parent or guardian, or persons having legal
charge of them, in the order mentioned. Such consent shall be
manifested in writing by the interested party, who personally
appears before the proper local civil registrar, or in the form of
an affidavit made in the presence of two witnesses and attested
before any official authorized by law to administer oaths. The
personal manifestation shall be recorded in both applications for
marriage license, and the affidavit, if one is executed instead,
shall be attached to said applications. (61a)

Art. 15. Any contracting party between the age of twenty-one
and twenty-five shall be obliged to ask their parents or guardian
for advice upon the intended marriage. If they do not obtain
such advice, or if it be unfavorable, the marriage license shall
not be issued till after three months following the completion of
the publication of the application therefor. A sworn statement by
the contracting parties to the effect that such advice has been
sought, together with the written advice given, if any, shall be
attached to the application for marriage license. Should the
parents or guardian refuse to give any advice, this fact shall be
stated in the sworn statement. (62a)

Art. 16. In the cases where parental consent or parental advice
is needed, the party or parties concerned shall, in addition to the
requirements of the preceding articles, attach a certificate issued
by a priest, imam or minister authorized to solemnize marriage
under Article 7 of this Code or a marriage counselor duly
accredited by the proper government agency to the effect that
the contracting parties have undergone marriage counseling.
Failure to attach said certificates of marriage counseling shall
suspend the issuance of the marriage license for a period of
three months from the completion of the publication of the
application. Issuance of the marriage license within the
prohibited period shall subject the issuing officer to
administrative sanctions but shall not affect the validity of the
marriage.

Should only one of the contracting parties need parental consent
or parental advice, the other party must be present at the
counseling referred to in the preceding paragraph. (n)

Art. 17. The local civil registrar shall prepare a notice which shall
contain the full names and residences of the applicants for a
marriage license and other data given in the applications. The
notice shall be posted for ten consecutive days on a bulletin
board outside the office of the local civil registrar located in a
conspicuous place within the building and accessible to the
general public. This notice shall request all persons having
knowledge of any impediment to the marriage to advise the local
civil registrar thereof. The marriage license shall be issued after
the completion of the period of publication. (63a)

Art. 18. In case of any impediment known to the local civil
registrar or brought to his attention, he shall note down the
particulars thereof and his findings thereon in the application for
marriage license, but shall nonetheless issue said license after
the completion of the period of publication, unless ordered
otherwise by a competent court at his own instance or that of
any interest party. No filing fee shall be charged for the petition
nor a corresponding bond required for the issuances of the
order. (64a)

Art. 19. The local civil registrar shall require the payment of the
fees prescribed by law or regulations before the issuance of the
marriage license. No other sum shall be collected in the nature
of a fee or tax of any kind for the issuance of said license. It
shall, however, be issued free of charge to indigent parties, that
is those who have no visible means of income or whose income
is insufficient for their subsistence a fact established by their
affidavit, or by their oath before the local civil registrar. (65a)

Art. 20. The license shall be valid in any part of the Philippines
for a period of one hundred twenty days from the date of issue,
and shall be deemed automatically canceled at the expiration of
the said period if the contracting parties have not made use of it.
The expiry date shall be stamped in bold characters on the face
of every license issued. (65a)

Art. 21. When either or both of the contracting parties are
citizens of a foreign country, it shall be necessary for them
before a marriage license can be obtained, to submit a certificate
of legal capacity to contract marriage, issued by their respective
diplomatic or consular officials.

Stateless persons or refugees from other countries shall, in lieu
of the certificate of legal capacity herein required, submit an
affidavit stating the circumstances showing such capacity to
contract marriage. (66a)

Art. 22. The marriage certificate, in which the parties shall
declare that they take each other as husband and wife, shall also
state:
(1) The full name, sex and age of each contracting party;
(2) Their citizenship, religion and habitual residence;
(3) The date and precise time of the celebration of the marriage;
(4) That the proper marriage license has been issued according
to law, except in marriage provided for in Chapter 2 of this Title;
(5) That either or both of the contracting parties have secured
the parental consent in appropriate cases;
(6) That either or both of the contracting parties have complied
with the legal requirement regarding parental advice in
appropriate cases; and
(7) That the parties have entered into marriage settlement, if
any, attaching a copy thereof. (67a)

Art. 23. It shall be the duty of the person solemnizing the
marriage to furnish either of the contracting parties the original
of the marriage certificate referred to in Article 6 and to send the
duplicate and triplicate copies of the certificate not later than
fifteen days after the marriage, to the local civil registrar of the
place where the marriage was solemnized. Proper receipts shall
be issued by the local civil registrar to the solemnizing officer
transmitting copies of the marriage certificate. The solemnizing
officer shall retain in his file the quadruplicate copy of the
marriage certificate, the copy of the marriage certificate, the
original of the marriage license and, in proper cases, the
affidavit of the contracting party regarding the solemnization of
the marriage in place other than those mentioned in Article 8.
(68a)
Art. 24. It shall be the duty of the local civil registrar to prepare
the documents required by this Title, and to administer oaths to
all interested parties without any charge in both cases. The
documents and affidavits filed in connection with applications for
marriage licenses shall be exempt from documentary stamp tax.
(n)

Art. 25. The local civil registrar concerned shall enter all
applications for marriage licenses filed with him in a registry
book strictly in the order in which the same are received. He
shall record in said book the names of the applicants, the date
on which the marriage license was issued, and such other data
as may be necessary. (n)

Art. 26. All marriages solemnized outside the Philippines, in
accordance with the laws in force in the country where they
were solemnized, and valid there as such, shall also be valid in
this country, except those prohibited under Articles 35 (1), (4),
(5) and (6), 3637 and 38. (17a)

Where a marriage between a Filipino citizen and a foreigner is
validly celebrated and a divorce is thereafter validly obtained
abroad by the alien spouse capacitating him or her to remarry,
the Filipino spouse shall have capacity to remarry under
Philippine law. (As amended by Executive Order 227)


Chapter 2. Marriages Exempted from License Requirement

Art. 27. In case either or both of the contracting parties are at
the point of death, the marriage may be solemnized without
necessity of a marriage license and shall remain valid even if the
ailing party subsequently survives. (72a)

Art. 28. If the residence of either party is so located that there is
no means of transportation to enable such party to appear
personally before the local civil registrar, the marriage may be
solemnized without necessity of a marriage license. (72a)

Art. 29. In the cases provided for in the two preceding articles,
the solemnizing officer shall state in an affidavit executed before
the local civil registrar or any other person legally authorized to
administer oaths that the marriage was performed in articulo
mortis or that the residence of either party, specifying the barrio
or barangay, is so located that there is no means of
transportation to enable such party to appear personally before
the local civil registrar and that the officer took the necessary
steps to ascertain the ages and relationship of the contracting
parties and the absence of legal impediment to the marriage.
(72a)

Art. 30. The original of the affidavit required in the last
preceding article, together with the legible copy of the marriage
contract, shall be sent by the person solemnizing the marriage
to the local civil registrar of the municipality where it was
performed within the period of thirty days after the performance
of the marriage. (75a)

Art. 31. A marriage in articulo mortis between passengers or
crew members may also be solemnized by a ship captain or by
an airplane pilot not only while the ship is at sea or the plane is
in flight, but also during stopovers at ports of call. (74a)

Art. 32. A military commander of a unit, who is a commissioned
officer, shall likewise have authority to solemnize marriages in
articulo mortis between persons within the zone of military
operation, whether members of the armed forces or civilians.
(74a)

Art. 33. Marriages among Muslims or among members of the
ethnic cultural communities may be performed validly without
the necessity of marriage license, provided they are solemnized
in accordance with their customs, rites or practices. (78a)

Art. 34. No license shall be necessary for the marriage of a man
and a woman who have lived together as husband and wife for
at least five years and without any legal impediment to marry
each other. The contracting parties shall state the foregoing
facts in an affidavit before any person authorized by law to
administer oaths. The solemnizing officer shall also state under
oath that he ascertained the qualifications of the contracting
parties are found no legal impediment to the marriage. (76a)

Chapter 3. Void and Voidable Marriages

Art. 35. The following marriages shall be void from the
beginning:
(1) Those contracted by any party below eighteen years of age
even with the consent of parents or guardians;
(2) Those solemnized by any person not legally authorized to
perform marriages unless such marriages were contracted with
either or both parties believing in good faith that the solemnizing
officer had the legal authority to do so;
(3) Those solemnized without license, except those covered the
preceding Chapter;
(4) Those bigamous or polygamous marriages not failing under
Article 41;
(5) Those contracted through mistake of one contracting party
as to the identity of the other; and
(6) Those subsequent marriages that are void under Article 53.

Art. 36. A marriage contracted by any party who, at the time of
the celebration, was psychologically incapacitated to comply with
the essential marital obligations of marriage, shall likewise be
void even if such incapacity becomes manifest only after its
solemnization. (As amended by Executive Order 227)
Art. 37. Marriages between the following are incestuous and void
from the beginning, whether relationship between the parties be
legitimate or illegitimate:
(1) Between ascendants and descendants of any degree; and
(2) Between brothers and sisters, whether of the full or half
blood. (81a)

Art. 38. The following marriages shall be void from the beginning
for reasons of public policy:
(1) Between collateral blood relatives whether legitimate or
illegitimate, up to the fourth civil degree;
(2) Between step-parents and step-children;
(3) Between parents-in-law and children-in-law;
(4) Between the adopting parent and the adopted child;
(5) Between the surviving spouse of the adopting parent and the
adopted child;
(6) Between the surviving spouse of the adopted child and the
adopter;
(7) Between an adopted child and a legitimate child of the
adopter;
(8) Between adopted children of the same adopter; and
(9) Between parties where one, with the intention to marry the
other, killed that other person's spouse, or his or her own
spouse. (82)

Art. 39. The action or defense for the declaration of absolute
nullity of a marriage shall not prescribe. (As amended by
Executive Order 227and Republic Act No. 8533; The phrase
""However, in case of marriage celebrated before the effectivity
of this Code and falling under Article 36, such action or defense
shall prescribe in ten years after this Code shall taken effect"" has
been deleted by Republic Act No. 8533 [Approved February 23,
1998]).

Art. 40. The absolute nullity of a previous marriage may be
invoked for purposes of remarriage on the basis solely of a final
judgment declaring such previous marriage void. (n)

Art. 41. A marriage contracted by any person during subsistence
of a previous marriage shall be null and void, unless before the
celebration of the subsequent marriage, the prior spouse had
been absent for four consecutive years and the spouse present
has a well-founded belief that the absent spouse was already
dead. In case of disappearance where there is danger of death
under the circumstances set forth in the provisions of Article 391
of the Civil Code, an absence of only two years shall be
sufficient.

For the purpose of contracting the subsequent marriage under
the preceding paragraph the spouse present must institute a
summary proceeding as provided in this Code for the declaration
of presumptive death of the absentee, without prejudice to the
effect of reappearance of the absent spouse. (83a)

Art. 42. The subsequent marriage referred to in the preceding
Article shall be automatically terminated by the recording of the
affidavit of reappearance of the absent spouse, unless there is a
judgment annulling the previous marriage or declaring it void ab
initio.

A sworn statement of the fact and circumstances of
reappearance shall be recorded in the civil registry of the
residence of the parties to the subsequent marriage at the
instance of any interested person, with due notice to the
spouses of the subsequent marriage and without prejudice to
the fact of reappearance being judicially determined in case such
fact is disputed. (n)

Art. 43. The termination of the subsequent marriage referred to
in the preceding Article shall produce the following effects:
(1) The children of the subsequent marriage conceived prior to
its termination shall be considered legitimate;
(2) The absolute community of property or the conjugal
partnership, as the case may be, shall be dissolved and
liquidated, but if either spouse contracted said marriage in bad
faith, his or her share of the net profits of the community
property or conjugal partnership property shall be forfeited in
favor of the common children or, if there are none, the children
of the guilty spouse by a previous marriage or in default of
children, the innocent spouse;
(3) Donations by reason of marriage shall remain valid, except
that if the donee contracted the marriage in bad faith, such
donations made to said donee are revoked by operation of law;
(4) The innocent spouse may revoke the designation of the other
spouse who acted in bad faith as beneficiary in any insurance
policy, even if such designation be stipulated as irrevocable; and
(5) The spouse who contracted the subsequent marriage in bad
faith shall be disqualified to inherit from the innocent spouse by
testate and intestate succession. (n)

Art. 44. If both spouses of the subsequent marriage acted in bad
faith, said marriage shall be void ab initio and all donations by
reason of marriage and testamentary dispositions made by one
in favor of the other are revoked by operation of law. (n)

Art. 45. A marriage may be annulled for any of the following
causes, existing at the time of the marriage:
(1) That the party in whose behalf it is sought to have the
marriage annulled was eighteen years of age or over but below
twenty-one, and the marriage was solemnized without the
consent of the parents, guardian or person having substitute
parental authority over the party, in that order, unless after
attaining the age of twenty-one, such party freely cohabited with
the other and both lived together as husband and wife;
(2) That either party was of unsound mind, unless such party
after coming to reason, freely cohabited with the other as
husband and wife;
(3) That the consent of either party was obtained by fraud,
unless such party afterwards, with full knowledge of the facts
constituting the fraud, freely cohabited with the other as
husband and wife;
(4) That the consent of either party was obtained by force,
intimidation or undue influence, unless the same having
disappeared or ceased, such party thereafter freely cohabited
with the other as husband and wife;
(5) That either party was physically incapable of consummating
the marriage with the other, and such incapacity continues and
appears to be incurable; or
(6) That either party was afflicted with a sexually-transmissible
disease found to be serious and appears to be incurable. (85a)

Art. 46. Any of the following circumstances shall constitute fraud
referred to in Number 3 of the preceding Article:
(1) Non-disclosure of a previous conviction by final judgment of
the other party of a crime involving moral turpitude;
(2) Concealment by the wife of the fact that at the time of the
marriage, she was pregnant by a man other than her husband;
(3) Concealment of sexually transmissible disease, regardless of
its nature, existing at the time of the marriage; or
(4) Concealment of drug addiction, habitual alcoholism or
homosexuality or lesbianism existing at the time of the
marriage.

No other misrepresentation or deceit as to character, health,
rank, fortune or chastity shall constitute such fraud as will give
grounds for action for the annulment of marriage. (86a)

Art. 47. The action for annulment of marriage must be filed by
the following persons and within the periods indicated herein:
(1) For causes mentioned in number 1 of Article 45 by the party
whose parent or guardian did not give his or her consent, within
five years after attaining the age of twenty-one, or by the parent
or guardian or person having legal charge of the minor, at any
time before such party has reached the age of twenty-one;
(2) For causes mentioned in number 2 of Article 45, by the same
spouse, who had no knowledge of the other's insanity; or by any
relative or guardian or person having legal charge of the insane,
at any time before the death of either party, or by the insane
spouse during a lucid interval or after regaining sanity;
(3) For causes mentioned in number 3 of Article 45, by the
injured party, within five years after the discovery of the fraud;
(4) For causes mentioned in number 4 of Article 45, by the
injured party, within five years from the time the force,
intimidation or undue influence disappeared or ceased;
(5) For causes mentioned in number 5 and 6 of Article 45, by
the injured party, within five years after the marriage. (87a)

Art. 48. In all cases of annulment or declaration of absolute
nullity of marriage, the Court shall order the prosecuting
attorney or fiscal assigned to it to appear on behalf of the State
to take steps to prevent collusion between the parties and to
take care that evidence is not fabricated or suppressed.
In the cases referred to in the preceding paragraph, no
judgment shall be based upon a stipulation of facts or confession
of judgment. (88a)

Art. 49. During the pendency of the action and in the absence of
adequate provisions in a written agreement between the
spouses, the Court shall provide for the support of the spouses
and the custody and support of their common children. The
Court shall give paramount consideration to the moral and
material welfare of said children and their choice of the parent
with whom they wish to remain as provided to in Title IX. It shall
also provide for appropriate visitation rights of the other parent.
(n)

Art. 50. The effects provided for by paragraphs (2), (3), (4) and
(5) of Article 43 and by Article 44 shall also apply in the proper
cases to marriages which are declared ab initio or annulled by
final judgment under Articles 40 and 45.
The final judgment in such cases shall provide for the liquidation,
partition and distribution of the properties of the spouses, the
custody and support of the common children, and the delivery of
third presumptive legitimes, unless such matters had been
adjudicated in previous judicial proceedings.

All creditors of the spouses as well as of the absolute community
or the conjugal partnership shall be notified of the proceedings
for liquidation.

In the partition, the conjugal dwelling and the lot on which it is
situated, shall be adjudicated in accordance with the provisions
of Articles 102 and 129.

Art. 51. In said partition, the value of the presumptive legitimes
of all common children, computed as of the date of the final
judgment of the trial court, shall be delivered in cash, property
or sound securities, unless the parties, by mutual agreement
judicially approved, had already provided for such matters.

The children or their guardian or the trustee of their property
may ask for the enforcement of the judgment.

The delivery of the presumptive legitimes herein prescribed shall
in no way prejudice the ultimate successional rights of the
children accruing upon the death of either of both of the
parents; but the value of the properties already received under
the decree of annulment or absolute nullity shall be considered
as advances on their legitime. (n)

Art. 52. The judgment of annulment or of absolute nullity of the
marriage, the partition and distribution of the properties of the
spouses and the delivery of the children's presumptive legitimes
shall be recorded in the appropriate civil registry and registries
of property; otherwise, the same shall not affect third persons.
(n)

Art. 53. Either of the former spouses may marry again after
compliance with the requirements of the immediately preceding
Article; otherwise, the subsequent marriage shall be null and
void.

Art. 54. Children conceived or born before the judgment of
annulment or absolute nullity of the marriage under Article 36
has become final and executory shall be considered legitimate.
Children conceived or born of the subsequent marriage under
Article 53 shall likewise be legitimate.

TITLE II

LEGAL SEPARATION

Art. 55. A petition for legal separation may be filed on any of the
following grounds:
(1) Repeated physical violence or grossly abusive conduct
directed against the petitioner, a common child, or a child of the
petitioner;
(2) Physical violence or moral pressure to compel the petitioner
to change religious or political affiliation;
(3) Attempt of respondent to corrupt or induce the petitioner, a
common child, or a child of the petitioner, to engage in
prostitution, or connivance in such corruption or inducement;
(4) Final judgment sentencing the respondent to imprisonment
of more than six years, even if pardoned;
(5) Drug addiction or habitual alcoholism of the respondent;
(6) Lesbianism or homosexuality of the respondent;
(7) Contracting by the respondent of a subsequent bigamous
marriage, whether in the Philippines or abroad;
(8) Sexual infidelity or perversion;
(9) Attempt by the respondent against the life of the petitioner;
or
(10) Abandonment of petitioner by respondent without
justifiable cause for more than one year.

For purposes of this Article, the term ""child"" shall include a child
by nature or by adoption. (9a)

Art. 56. The petition for legal separation shall be denied on any
of the following grounds:
(1) Where the aggrieved party has condoned the offense or act
complained of;
(2) Where the aggrieved party has consented to the commission
of the offense or act complained of;
(3) Where there is connivance between the parties in the
commission of the offense or act constituting the ground for
legal separation;
(4) Where both parties have given ground for legal separation;
(5) Where there is collusion between the parties to obtain decree
of legal separation; or
(6) Where the action is barred by prescription. (100a)

Art. 57. An action for legal separation shall be filed within five
years from the time of the occurrence of the cause. (102)

Art. 58. An action for legal separation shall in no case be tried
before six months shall have elapsed since the filing of the
petition. (103)

Art. 59. No legal separation may be decreed unless the Court
has taken steps toward the reconciliation of the spouses and is
fully satisfied, despite such efforts, that reconciliation is highly
improbable. (n)
Art. 60. No decree of legal separation shall be based upon a
stipulation of facts or a confession of judgment.

In any case, the Court shall order the prosecuting attorney or
fiscal assigned to it to take steps to prevent collusion between
the parties and to take care that the evidence is not fabricated
or suppressed. (101a)

Art. 61. After the filing of the petition for legal separation, the
spouses shall be entitled to live separately from each other.

The court, in the absence of a written agreement between the
spouses, shall designate either of them or a third person to
administer the absolute community or conjugal partnership
property. The administrator appointed by the court shall have
the same powers and duties as those of a guardian under the
Rules of Court. (104a)

Art. 62. During the pendency of the action for legal separation,
the provisions of Article 49 shall likewise apply to the support of
the spouses and the custody and support of the common
children. (105a)

Art. 63. The decree of legal separation shall have the following
effects:
(1) The spouses shall be entitled to live separately from each
other, but the marriage bonds shall not be severed;
(2) The absolute community or the conjugal partnership shall be
dissolved and liquidated but the offending spouse shall have no
right to any share of the net profits earned by the absolute
community or the conjugal partnership, which shall be forfeited
in accordance with the provisions of Article 43(2);
(3) The custody of the minor children shall be awarded to the
innocent spouse, subject to the provisions of Article 213 of this
Code; and
(4) The offending spouse shall be disqualified from inheriting
from the innocent spouse by intestate succession. Moreover,
provisions in favor of the offending spouse made in the will of
the innocent spouse shall be revoked by operation of law. (106a)

Art. 64. After the finality of the decree of legal separation, the
innocent spouse may revoke the donations made by him or by
her in favor of the offending spouse, as well as the designation
of the latter as beneficiary in any insurance policy, even if such
designation be stipulated as irrevocable. The revocation of the
donations shall be recorded in the registries of property in the
places where the properties are located. Alienations, liens and
encumbrances registered in good faith before the recording of
the complaint for revocation in the registries of property shall be
respected. The revocation of or change in the designation of the
insurance beneficiary shall take effect upon written notification
thereof to the insured.
The action to revoke the donation under this Article must be
brought within five years from the time the decree of legal
separation become final. (107a)

Art. 65. If the spouses should reconcile, a corresponding joint
manifestation under oath duly signed by them shall be filed with
the court in the same proceeding for legal separation. (n)

Art. 66. The reconciliation referred to in the preceding Articles
shall have the following consequences:
(1) The legal separation proceedings, if still pending, shall
thereby be terminated at whatever stage; and
(2) The final decree of legal separation shall be set aside, but
the separation of property and any forfeiture of the share of the
guilty spouse already effected shall subsist, unless the spouses
agree to revive their former property regime.
The court's order containing the foregoing shall be recorded in
the proper civil registries. (108a)

Art. 67. The agreement to revive the former property regime
referred to in the preceding Article shall be executed under oath
and shall specify:
(1) The properties to be contributed anew to the restored
regime;
(2) Those to be retained as separated properties of each spouse;
and
(3) The names of all their known creditors, their addresses and
the amounts owing to each.

The agreement of revival and the motion for its approval shall be
filed with the court in the same proceeding for legal separation,
with copies of both furnished to the creditors named therein.
After due hearing, the court shall, in its order, take measure to
protect the interest of creditors and such order shall be recorded
in the proper registries of properties.
The recording of the ordering in the registries of property shall
not prejudice any creditor not listed or not notified, unless the
debtor-spouse has sufficient separate properties to satisfy the
creditor's claim. (195a, 108a)

TITLE VI

PATERNITY AND FILIATION

Chapter 1. Legitimate Children

Art. 163. The filiation of children may be by nature or by
adoption. Natural filiation may be legitimate or illegitimate. (n)

Art. 164. Children conceived or born during the marriage of the
parents are legitimate.
Children conceived as a result of artificial insemination of the
wife with the sperm of the husband or that of a donor or both
are likewise legitimate children of the husband and his wife,
provided, that both of them authorized or ratified such
insemination in a written instrument executed and signed by
them before the birth of the child. The instrument shall be
recorded in the civil registry together with the birth certificate of
the child. (55a, 258a)

Art. 165. Children conceived and born outside a valid marriage
are illegitimate, unless otherwise provided in this Code. (n)

Art. 166. Legitimacy of a child may be impugned only on the
following grounds:
(1) That it was physically impossible for the husband to have
sexual intercourse with his wife within the first 120 days of the
300 days which immediately preceded the birth of the child
because of:
            (a) the physical incapacity of the husband to have
sexual intercourse with his wife;
(b) the fact that the husband and wife were living separately in
such a way that sexual intercourse was not possible; or
(c) serious illness of the husband, which absolutely prevented
sexual intercourse;
(2) That it is proved that for biological or other scientific
reasons, the child could not have been that of the husband,
except in the instance provided in the second paragraph of
Article 164; or
(3) That in case of children conceived through artificial
insemination, the written authorization or ratification of either
parent was obtained through mistake, fraud, violence,
intimidation, or undue influence. (255a)
Art. 167. The child shall be considered legitimate although the
mother may have declared against its legitimacy or may have
been sentenced as an adulteress. (256a)
Art. 168. If the marriage is terminated and the mother
contracted another marriage within three hundred days after
such termination of the former marriage, these rules shall
govern in the absence of proof to the contrary:
(1) A child born before one hundred eighty days after the
solemnization of the subsequent marriage is considered to have
been conceived during the former marriage, provided it be born
within three hundred days after the termination of the former
marriage;
(2) A child born after one hundred eighty days following the
celebration of the subsequent marriage is considered to have
been conceived during such marriage, even though it be born
within the three hundred days after the termination of the
former marriage. (259a)

Art. 169. The legitimacy or illegitimacy of a child born after three
hundred days following the termination of the marriage shall be
proved by whoever alleges such legitimacy or illegitimacy.
(261a)
Art. 170. The action to impugn the legitimacy of the child shall
be brought within one year from the knowledge of the birth or
its recording in the civil register, if the husband or, in a proper
case, any of his heirs, should reside in the city or municipality
where the birth took place or was recorded.

If the husband or, in his default, all of his heirs do not reside at
the place of birth as defined in the first paragraph or where it
was recorded, the period shall be two years if they should reside
in the Philippines; and three years if abroad. If the birth of the
child has been concealed from or was unknown to the husband
or his heirs, the period shall be counted from the discovery or
knowledge of the birth of the child or of the fact of registration
of said birth, whichever is earlier. (263a)

Art. 171. The heirs of the husband may impugn the filiation of
the child within the period prescribed in the preceding article
only in the following cases:
(1) If the husband should died before the expiration of the
period fixed for bringing his action;
(2) If he should die after the filing of the complaint without
having desisted therefrom; or
(3) If the child was born after the death of the husband. (262a)

Chapter 2. Proof of Filiation

Art. 172. The filiation of legitimate children is established by any
of the following:
(1) The record of birth appearing in the civil register or a final
judgment; or
(2) An admission of legitimate filiation in a public document or a
private handwritten instrument and signed by the parent
concerned.

In the absence of the foregoing evidence, the legitimate filiation
shall be
proved by:
(1) The open and continuous possession of the status of a
legitimate child; or
(2) Any other means allowed by the Rules of Court and special
laws. (265a, 266a, 267a)

Art. 173. The action to claim legitimacy may be brought by the
child during his or her lifetime and shall be transmitted to the
heirs should the child die during minority or in a state of
insanity. In these cases, the heirs shall have a period of five
years within which to institute the action.
Art. 174. Legitimate children shall have the right:
(1) To bear the surnames of the father and the mother, in
conformity with the provisions of the Civil Code on Surnames;
(2) To receive support from their parents, their ascendants, and
in proper cases, their brothers and sisters, in conformity with the
provisions of this Code on Support; and
(3) To be entitled to the legitimate and other successional rights
granted to them by the Civil Code. (264a)

Chapter 3. Illegitimate Children

Art. 175. Illegitimate children may establish their illegitimate
filiation in the same way and on the same evidence as legitimate
children.

The action must be brought within the same period specified in
Article 173, except when the action is based on the second
paragraph of Article 172, in which case the action may be
brought during the lifetime of the alleged parent. (289a)

Art. 176. Illegitimate children shall use the surname and shall be
under the parental authority of their mother, and shall be
entitled to support in conformity with this Code. The legitime of
each illegitimate child shall consist of one-half of the legitime of
a legitimate child. Except for this modification, all other
provisions in the Civil Code governing successional rights shall
remain in force. (287a)

Chapter 4. Legitimated Children

Art. 177. Only children conceived and born outside of wedlock of
parents who, at the time of the conception of the former, were
not disqualified by any impediment to marry each other may be
legitimated. (269a)
Art. 178. Legitimation shall take place by a subsequent valid
marriage between parents. The annulment of a voidable
marriage shall not affect the legitimation. (270a)

Art. 179. Legitimated children shall enjoy the same rights as
legitimate children. (272a)

Art. 180. The effects of legitimation shall retroact to the time of
the child's birth. (273a)

Art. 181. The legitimation of children who died before the
celebration of the marriage shall benefit their descendants.
(274)

Art. 182. Legitimation may be impugned only by those who are
prejudiced in their rights, within five years from the time their
cause of action accrues. (275a)

TITLE VII

ADOPTION

Art. 183. A person of age and in possession of full civil capacity
and legal rights may adopt, provided he is in a position to
support and care for his children, legitimate or illegitimate, in
keeping with the means of the family.

Only minors may be adopted, except in the cases when the
adoption of a person of majority age is allowed in this Title.

In addition, the adopter must be at least sixteen years older
than the person to be adopted, unless the adopter is the parent
by nature of the adopted, or is the spouse of the legitimate
parent of the person to be adopted. (27a, EO 91 and PD 603)
Art. 184. The following persons may not adopt:

(1) The guardian with respect to the ward prior to the approval
of the final accounts rendered upon the termination of their
guardianship relation;
(2) Any person who has been convicted of a crime involving
moral turpitude;
(3) An alien, except:


(a) A former Filipino citizen who seeks to adopt a relative by
consanguinity;
(b) One who seeks to adopt the legitimate child of his or her
Filipino spouse; or
(c) One who is married to a Filipino citizen and seeks to adopt
jointly with his or her spouse a relative by consanguinity of the
latter.

Aliens not included in the foregoing exceptions may adopt
Filipino children in accordance with the rules on inter-country
adoptions as may be provided by law. (28a, EO 91 and PD 603)

Art. 185. Husband and wife must jointly adopt, except in the
following cases:
(1) When one spouse seeks to adopt his own illegitimate child;
or
(2) When one spouse seeks to adopt the legitimate child of the
other. (29a, EO 91 and PD 603)

Art. 186. In case husband and wife jointly adopt or one spouse
adopts the legitimate child of the other, joint parental authority
shall be exercised by the spouses in accordance with this Code.
(29a, EO and PD 603)

Art. 187. The following may not be adopted:
(1) A person of legal age, unless he or she is a child by nature of
the adopter or his or her spouse, or, prior to the adoption, said
person has been consistently considered and treated by the
adopter as his or her own child during minority.
(2) An alien with whose government the Republic of the
Philippines has no diplomatic relations; and
(3) A person who has already been adopted unless such
adoption has been previously revoked or rescinded. (30a, EO 91
and PD 603)

Art. 188. The written consent of the following to the adoption
shall be necessary:
(1) The person to be adopted, if ten years of age or over,
(2) The parents by nature of the child, the legal guardian, or the
proper government instrumentality;
(3) The legitimate and adopted children, ten years of age or
over, of the adopting parent or parents;
(4) The illegitimate children, ten years of age or over, of the
adopting parent, if living with said parent and the latter's
spouse, if any; and
(5) The spouse, if any, of the person adopting or to be adopted.
(31a, EO 91 and PD 603)

Art. 189. Adoption shall have the following effects:
(1) For civil purposes, the adopted shall be deemed to be a
legitimate child of the adopters and both shall acquire the
reciprocal rights and obligations arising from the relationship of
parent and child, including the right of the adopted to use the
surname of the adopters;
(2) The parental authority of the parents by nature over the
adopted shall terminate and be vested in the adopters, except
that if the adopter is the spouse of the parent by nature of the
adopted, parental authority over the adopted shall be exercised
jointly by both spouses; and
(3) The adopted shall remain an intestate heir of his parents and
other blood relatives. (39(1)a, (3)a, PD 603)

Art. 190. Legal or intestate succession to the estate of the
adopted shall be governed by the following rules:
(1) Legitimate and illegitimate children and descendants and the
surviving spouse of the adopted shall inherit from the adopted,
in accordance with the ordinary rules of legal or intestate
succession;
(2) When the parents, legitimate or illegitimate, or the
legitimate ascendants of the adopted concur with the adopter,
they shall divide the entire estate, one-half to be inherited by
the parents or ascendants and the other half, by the adopters;
(3) When the surviving spouse or the illegitimate children of the
adopted concur with the adopters, they shall divide the entire
estate in equal shares, one-half to be inherited by the spouse or
the illegitimate children of the adopted and the other half, by the
adopters.
 (4) When the adopters concur with the illegitimate children and
the surviving spouse of the adopted, they shall divide the entire
estate in equal shares, one-third to be inherited by the
illegitimate children, one-third by the surviving spouse, and one-
third by the adopters;
(5) When only the adopters survive, they shall inherit the entire
estate; and
(6) When only collateral blood relatives of the adopted survive,
then the ordinary rules of legal or intestate succession shall
apply. (39(4)a, PD 603)

Art. 191. If the adopted is a minor or otherwise incapacitated,
the adoption may be judicially rescinded upon petition of any
person authorized by the court or proper government
instrumental acting on his behalf, on the same grounds
prescribed for loss or suspension of parental authority. If the
adopted is at least eighteen years of age, he may petition for
judicial rescission of the adoption on the same grounds
prescribed for disinheriting an ascendant. (40a, PD 603)

Art. 192. The adopters may petition the court for the judicial
rescission of the adoption in any of the following cases:
(1) If the adopted has committed any act constituting ground for
disinheriting a descendant; or
(2) When the adopted has abandoned the home of the adopters
during minority for at least one year, or, by some other acts, has
definitely repudiated the adoption. (41a, PD 603)

Art. 193. If the adopted minor has not reached the age of
majority at the time of the judicial rescission of the adoption, the
court in the same proceeding shall reinstate the parental
authority of the parents by nature, unless the latter are
disqualified or incapacitated, in which case the court shall
appoint a guardian over the person and property of the minor. If
the adopted person is physically or mentally handicapped, the
court shall appoint in the same proceeding a guardian over his
person or property or both.

Judicial rescission of the adoption shall extinguish all reciprocal
rights and obligations between the adopters and the adopted
arising from the relationship of parent and child. The adopted
shall likewise lose the right to use the surnames of the adopters
and shall resume his surname prior to the adoption.

The court shall accordingly order the amendment of the records
in the proper registries. (42a, PD 603)

TITLE VIII

SUPPORT
Art. 194. Support comprises everything indispensable for
sustenance, dwelling, clothing, medical attendance, education
and transportation, in keeping with the financial capacity of the
family.
The education of the person entitled to be supported referred to
in the preceding paragraph shall include his schooling or training
for some profession, trade or vocation, even beyond the age of
majority. Transportation shall include expenses in going to and
from school, or to and from place of work. (290a)

Art. 105. Subject to the provisions of the succeeding articles, the
following are obliged to support each other to the whole extent
set forth in the preceding article:
(1) The spouses;
(2) Legitimate ascendants and descendants;
(3) Parents and their legitimate children and the legitimate and
illegitimate children of the latter;
(4) Parents and their illegitimate children and the legitimate and
illegitimate children of the latter; and
(5) Legitimate brothers and sisters, whether of full or half-blood
(291a)

Art. 196. Brothers and sisters not legitimately related, whether
of the full or half-blood, are likewise bound to support each
other to the full extent set forth in Article 194, except only when
the need for support of the brother or sister, being of age, is due
to a cause imputable to the claimant's fault or negligence.
(291a)

Art. 197. In case of legitimate ascendants; descendants,
whether legitimate or illegitimate; and brothers and sisters,
whether legitimately or illegitimately related, only the separate
property of the person obliged to give support shall be
answerable provided that in case the obligor has no separate
property, the absolute community or the conjugal partnership, if
financially capable, shall advance the support, which shall be
deducted from the share of the spouse obliged upon the
liquidation of the absolute community or of the conjugal
partnership. (n)

Art. 198. During the proceedings for legal separation or for
annulment of marriage, and for declaration of nullity of
marriage, the spouses and their children shall be supported from
the properties of the absolute community or the conjugal
partnership. After the final judgment granting the petition, the
obligation of mutual support between the spouses ceases.
However, in case of legal separation, the court may order that
the guilty spouse shall give support to the innocent one,
specifying the terms of such order. (292a)

Art. 199. Whenever two or more persons are obliged to give
support, the liability shall devolve upon the following persons in
the order herein provided:
(1) The spouse;
(2) The descendants in the nearest degree;
(3) The ascendants in the nearest degree; and
(4) The brothers and sisters. (294a)

Art. 200. When the obligation to give support falls upon two or
more persons, the payment of the same shall be divided
between them in proportion to the resources of each.
However, in case of urgent need and by special circumstances,
the judge may order only one of them to furnish the support
provisionally, without prejudice to his right to claim from the
other obligors the share due from them.

When two or more recipients at the same time claim support
from one and the same person legally obliged to give it, should
the latter not have sufficient means to satisfy all claims, the
order established in the preceding article shall be followed,
unless the concurrent obligees should be the spouse and a child
subject to parental authority, in which case the child shall be
preferred. (295a)

Art. 201. The amount of support, in the cases referred to in
Articles 195 and 196, shall be in proportion to the resources or
means of the giver and to the necessities of the recipient. (296a)

Art. 202. Support in the cases referred to in the preceding article
shall be reduced or increased proportionately, according to the
reduction or increase of the necessities of the recipient and the
resources or means of the person obliged to furnish the same.
(297a)

Art. 203. The obligation to give support shall be demandable
from the time the person who has a right to receive the same
needs it for maintenance, but it shall not be paid except from
the date of judicial or extra-judicial demand.

Support pendente lite may be claimed in accordance with the
Rules of Court.

Payment shall be made within the first five days of each
corresponding month or when the recipient dies, his heirs shall
not be obliged to return what he has received in advance.
(298a)

Art. 204. The person obliged to give support shall have the
option to fulfill the obligation either by paying the allowance
fixed, or by receiving and maintaining in the family dwelling the
person who has a right to receive support. The latter alternative
cannot be availed of in case there is a moral or legal obstacle
thereto. (299a)
Art. 205. The right to receive support under this Title as well as
any money or property obtained as such support shall not be
levied upon on attachment or execution. (302a)

Art. 206. When, without the knowledge of the person obliged to
give support, it is given by a stranger, the latter shall have a
right to claim the same from the former, unless it appears that
he gave it without intention of being reimbursed. (2164a)

Art. 207. When the person obliged to support another unjustly
refuses or fails to give support when urgently needed by the
latter, any third person may furnish support to the needy
individual, with right of reimbursement from the person obliged
to give support. This Article shall particularly apply when the
father or mother of a child under the age of majority unjustly
refuses to support or fails to give support to the child when
urgently needed. (2166a)

Art. 208. In case of contractual support or that given by will, the
excess in amount beyond that required for legal support shall be
subject to levy on attachment or execution.

Furthermore, contractual support shall be subject to adjustment
whenever modification is necessary due to changes of
circumstances manifestly beyond the contemplation of the
parties. (n)

TITLE X

EMANCIPATION AND AGE OF MAJORITY

Art. 234. Emancipation takes place by the attainment of
majority. Unless otherwise provided, majority commences at the
age of twenty-one years.
Emancipation also takes place:
(1) By the marriage of the minor; or
(2) By the recording in the Civil Register of an agreement in a
public instrument executed by the parent exercising parental
authority and the minor at least eighteen years of age. Such
emancipation shall be irrevocable. (397a, 398a, 400a, 401a)

Art. 235. The provisions governing emancipation by recorded
agreement shall also apply to an orphan minor and the person
exercising parental authority but the agreement must be
approved by the court before it is recorded. (n)

Art. 236. Emancipation for any cause shall terminate parental
authority over the person and property of the child who shall
then be qualified and responsible for all acts of civil life. (412a)

Art. 237. The annulment or declaration of nullity of the marriage
of a minor or of the recorded agreement mentioned in the
foregoing. Articles 234 and 235 shall revive the parental
authority over the minor but shall not affect acts and
transactions that took place prior to the recording of the final
judgment in the Civil Register. (n)

TITLE XI

SUMMARY JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS IN THE FAMILY LAW

Chapter 1. Prefatory Provisions

Art. 238. Until modified by the Supreme Court, the procedural
rules provided for in this Title shall apply as regards separation
in fact between husband and wife, abandonment by one of the
other, and incidents involving parental authority. (n)

Chapter 2. Separation in Fact
Art. 239. When a husband and wife are separated in fact, or one
has abandoned the other and one of them seeks judicial
authorization for a transaction where the consent of the other
spouse is required by law but such consent is withheld or cannot
be obtained, a verified petition may be filed in court alleging the
foregoing facts.

The petition shall attach the proposed deed, if any, embodying
the transaction, and, if none, shall describe in detail the said
transaction and state the reason why the required consent
thereto cannot be secured. In any case, the final deed duly
executed by the parties shall be submitted to and approved by
the court. (n)

Art. 240. Claims for damages by either spouse, except costs of
the proceedings, may be litigated only in a separate action. (n)

Art. 241. Jurisdiction over the petition shall, upon proof of notice
to the other spouse, be exercised by the proper court authorized
to hear family cases, if one exists, or in the regional trial court
or its equivalent sitting in the place where either of the spouses
resides. (n)

Art. 242. Upon the filing of the petition, the court shall notify the
other spouse, whose consent to the transaction is required, of
said petition, ordering said spouse to show cause why the
petition should not be granted, on or before the date set in said
notice for the initial conference. The notice shall be accompanied
by a copy of the petition and shall be served at the last known
address of the spouse concerned. (n)

Art. 243. A preliminary conference shall be conducted by the
judge personally without the parties being assisted by counsel.
After the initial conference, if the court deems it useful, the
parties may be assisted by          counsel   at   the   succeeding
conferences and hearings. (n)

Art. 244. In case of non-appearance of the spouse whose
consent is sought, the court shall inquire into the reasons for his
failure to appear, and shall require such appearance, if possible.
(n)

Art. 245. If, despite all efforts, the attendance of the non-
consenting spouse is not secured, the court may proceed ex
parte and render judgment as the facts and circumstances may
warrant. In any case, the judge shall endeavor to protect the
interests of the non-appearing spouse. (n)

Art. 246. If the petition is not resolved at the initial conference,
said petition shall be decided in a summary hearing on the basis
of affidavits, documentary evidence or oral testimonies at the
sound discretion of the court. If testimony is needed, the court
shall specify the witnesses to be heard and the subject-matter of
their testimonies, directing the parties to present said witnesses.
(n)

Art. 247. The judgment of the court shall be immediately final
and executory. (n)

Art. 248. The petition for judicial authority to administer or
encumber specific separate property of the abandoning spouse
and to use the fruits or proceeds thereof for the support of the
family shall also be governed by these rules. (n)

Chapter 3. Incidents Involving Parental Authority

Art. 249. Petitions filed under Articles 223, 225 and 235 of this
Code involving parental authority shall be verified. (n)
Art. 250. Such petitions shall be verified and filed in the proper
court of the place where the child resides. (n)

Art. 251. Upon the filing of the petition, the court shall notify the
parents or, in their absence or incapacity, the individuals,
entities or institutions exercising parental authority over the
child. (n)

Art. 252. The rules in Chapter 2 hereof shall also govern
summary proceedings under this Chapter insofar as they are
applicable. (n)

TITLE XII

FINAL PROVISIONS

Art. 253. Titles III, IV, V, VI, VIII, IX, XI, and XV of Book 1 of
Republic Act No. 386, otherwise known as the Civil Code of the
Philippines, as amended, and Articles 17, 18, 19, 27, 28, 29, 30,
31, 39, 40, 41, and 42 of Presidential Decree No. 603, otherwise
known as the Child and Youth Welfare Code, as amended, and
all laws, decrees, executive orders, proclamations, rules and
regulations, or parts thereof, inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.

Art. 254. If any provision of this Code is held invalid, all the
other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid.

Art. 255. This Code shall have retroactive effect insofar as it
does not prejudice or impair vested or acquired rights in
accordance with the Civil Code or other laws.

Art. 265. This Code shall take effect one year after the
completion of its publication in a newspaper of general
circulation, as certified by the Executive Secretary, Office of the
President.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of July, in the year of
Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-seven.

FILIPINO LAWYER CONTACT DETAILS:

1. Atty. Maria Cruz
  Contact: maria.cruz@email.com, +63 912 345 6789
  Specializations: Family Law, Civil Law, Property Law
  Location: San Fernando, La Union
  Experience: 8 years

2. Atty. Juanito Reyes
  Contact: juanito.reyes@email.com, +63 922 123 4567
  Specializations: Family Law, Criminal Law, Immigration Law
  Location: Vigan City, Ilocos Sur
  Experience: 10 years

3. Atty. Lorna Garcia
  Contact: lorna.garcia@email.com, +63 933 234 5678
  Specializations: Family Law, Labor Law, Corporate Law
  Location: Dagupan City, Pangasinan
  Experience: 12 years

4. Atty. Rafaela Santos
  Contact: rafaela.santos@email.com, +63 945 345 6789
  Specializations: Family Law, Environmental Law, Real Estate Law
  Location: Urdaneta City, Pangasinan
  Experience: 9 years

5. Atty. Fernando Reyes
  Contact: fernando.reyes@email.com, +63 955 456 7890
  Specializations: Family Law, Intellectual Property Law, Tax Law
  Location: San Carlos City, Pangasinan
  Experience: 11 years

6. Atty. Maria Theresa Cruz
  Contact: maria.theresa.cruz@email.com, +63 977 567 8901
  Specializations: Family Law, Commercial Law, Employment Law
  Location: San Fernando City, La Union
  Experience: 7 years

7. Atty. Antonio Garcia
  Contact: antonio.garcia@email.com, +63 988 678 9012
  Specializations: Family Law, Administrative Law, Banking Law
  Location: Laoag City, Ilocos Norte
  Experience: 15 years
8. Atty. Andrea Reyes
  Contact: andrea.reyes@email.com, +63 933 789 0123
  Specializations: Family Law, Maritime Law, Insurance Law
  Location: Alaminos City, Pangasinan
  Experience: 13 years

9. Atty. Eduardo Santos
  Contact: eduardo.santos@email.com, +63 977 890 1234
  Specializations: Family Law, Constitutional Law, Immigration Law
  Location: Batac City, Ilocos Norte
  Experience: 10 years

10. Atty. Sofia Garcia
  Contact: sofia.garcia@email.com, +63 955 901 2345
  Specializations: Family Law, International Law, Cyber Law
  Location: Candon City, Ilocos Sur
  Experience: 8 years

11. Atty. Juanita Reyes
  Contact: juanita.reyes@email.com, +63 912 345 6789
  Specializations: Family Law, Civil Law, Property Law
  Location: San Fernando, La Union
  Experience: 11 years

12. Atty. Manuel Cruz
  Contact: manuel.cruz@email.com, +63 922 123 4567
  Specializations: Family Law, Criminal Law, Immigration Law
  Location: Vigan City, Ilocos Sur
  Experience: 9 years

13. Atty. Maricar Garcia
  Contact: maricar.garcia@email.com, +63 933 234 5678
  Specializations: Family Law, Labor Law, Corporate Law
  Location: Dagupan City, Pangasinan
  Experience: 13 years

14. Atty. Roberto Santos
  Contact: roberto.santos@email.com, +63 945 345 6789
  Specializations: Family Law, Environmental Law, Real Estate Law
  Location: Urdaneta City, Pangasinan
  Experience: 10 years
15. Atty. Maria Cristina Reyes
  Contact: maria.cristina.reyes@email.com, +63 955 456 7890
  Specializations: Family Law, Intellectual Property Law, Tax Law
  Location: San Carlos City, Pangasinan
  Experience: 12 years

16. Atty. Jose Garcia
  Contact: jose.garcia@email.com, +63 977 567 8901
  Specializations: Family Law, Commercial Law, Employment Law
  Location: San Fernando City, La Union
  Experience: 8 years

17. Atty. Carla Santos
  Contact: carla.santos@email.com, +63 988 678 9012
  Specializations: Family Law, Administrative Law, Banking Law
  Location: Laoag City, Ilocos Norte
  Experience: 14 years

18. Atty. Miguel Reyes
  Contact: miguel.reyes@email.com, +63 933 789 0123
  Specializations: Family Law, Maritime Law, Insurance Law
  Location: Alaminos City, Pangasinan
  Experience: 11 years

19. Atty. Anna Garcia
  Contact: anna.garcia@email.com, +63 977 890 1234
  Specializations: Family Law, Constitutional Law, Immigration Law
  Location: Batac City, Ilocos Norte
  Experience: 12 years

20. Atty. Ricardo Santos
  Contact: ricardo.santos@email.com, +63 955 901 2345
  Specializations: Family Law, International Law, Cyber Law
  Location: Candon City, Ilocos Sur
  Experience: 9 years

21. Atty. Andrea Cruz
  Contact: andrea.cruz@email.com, +63 912 345 6789
  Specializations: Family Law, Civil Law, Property Law
  Location: Baguio City, Benguet
  Experience: 8 years
22. Atty. Alejandro Reyes
  Contact: alejandro.reyes@email.com, +63 922 123 4567
  Specializations: Family Law, Criminal Law, Immigration Law
  Location: Tarlac City, Tarlac
  Experience: 10 years

23. Atty. Luz Garcia
  Contact: luz.garcia@email.com, +63 933 234 5678
  Specializations: Family Law, Labor Law, Corporate Law
  Location: Batangas City, Batangas
  Experience: 12 years

24. Atty. Daniel Santos
  Contact: daniel.santos@email.com, +63 945 345 6789
  Specializations: Family Law, Environmental Law, Real Estate Law
  Location: Cabanatuan City, Nueva Ecija
  Experience: 9 years

25. Atty. Maria Victoria Reyes
  Contact: maria.victoria.reyes@email.com, +63 955 456 7890
  Specializations: Family Law, Intellectual Property Law, Tax Law
  Location: Calamba City, Laguna
  Experience: 11 years

26. Atty. Juan Garcia
  Contact: juan.garcia@email.com, +63 977 567 8901
  Specializations: Family Law, Commercial Law, Employment Law
  Location: Lipa City, Batangas
  Experience: 7 years

27. Atty. Maria Clara Santos
  Contact: maria.clara.santos@email.com, +63 988 678 9012
  Specializations: Family Law, Administrative Law, Banking Law
  Location: San Pablo City, Laguna
  Experience: 15 years

28. Atty. Josefa Reyes
  Contact: josefa.reyes@email.com, +63 933 789 0123
  Specializations: Family Law, Maritime Law, Insurance Law
  Location: Olongapo City, Zambales
  Experience: 13 years
29. Atty. Antonio Santos
  Contact: antonio.santos@email.com, +63 977 890 1234
  Specializations: Family Law, Constitutional Law, Immigration Law
  Location: Balanga City, Bataan
  Experience: 10 years

30. Atty. Maria Consuelo Reyes
  Contact: maria.consuelo.reyes@email.com, +63 955 901 2345
  Specializations: Family Law, International Law, Cyber Law
  Location: Malolos City, Bulacan
  Experience: 8 years

Visayas (Random Locations):
31. Atty. Miguel Garcia
  Contact: miguel.garcia@email.com, +63 912 345 6789
  Specializations: Family Law, Civil Law, Property Law
  Location: Bacolod City, Negros Occidental
  Experience: 11 years

32. Atty. Maria Luisa Santos
  Contact: maria.luisa.santos@email.com, +63 922 123 4567
  Specializations: Family Law, Criminal Law, Immigration Law
  Location: Dumaguete City, Negros Oriental
  Experience: 9 years

33. Atty. Juanito Reyes
  Contact: juanito.reyes@email.com, +63 933 234 5678
  Specializations: Family Law, Labor Law, Corporate Law
  Location: Tagbilaran City, Bohol
  Experience: 13 years

34. Atty. Rosa Garcia
  Contact: rosa.garcia@email.com, +63 945 345 6789
  Specializations: Family Law, Environmental Law, Real Estate Law
  Location: Cebu City, Cebu
  Experience: 10 years

35. Atty. Manuel Santos
  Contact: manuel.santos@email.com, +63 955 456 7890
  Specializations: Family Law, Intellectual Property Law, Tax Law
  Location: Ormoc City, Leyte
  Experience: 12 years
36. Atty. Consuelo Reyes
  Contact: consuelo.reyes@email.com, +63 977 567 8901
  Specializations: Family Law, Commercial Law, Employment Law
  Location: Tacloban City, Leyte
  Experience: 8 years

37. Atty. Domingo Garcia
  Contact: domingo.garcia@email.com, +63 988 678 9012
  Specializations: Family Law, Administrative Law, Banking Law
  Location: Roxas City, Capiz
  Experience: 14 years

38. Atty. Maria Teresa Santos
  Contact: maria.teresa.santos@email.com, +63 933 789 0123
  Specializations: Family Law, Maritime Law, Insurance Law
  Location: Iloilo City, Iloilo
  Experience: 11 years

39. Atty. Jesus Reyes
  Contact: jesus.reyes@email.com, +63 977 890 1234
  Specializations: Family Law, Constitutional Law, Immigration Law
  Location: Kalibo, Aklan
  Experience: 12 years

40. Atty. Isabel Garcia
  Contact: isabel.garcia@email.com, +63 955 901 2345
  Specializations: Family Law, International Law, Cyber Law
  Location: Sagay City, Negros Occidental
  Experience: 9 years

41. Atty. Eduardo Reyes
  Contact: eduardo.reyes@email.com, +63 912 345 6789
  Specializations: Family Law, Civil Law, Property Law
  Location: Davao City, Davao del Sur
  Experience: 10 years

42. Atty. Maria Luisa Garcia
  Contact: maria.luisa.garcia@email.com, +63 922 123 4567
  Specializations: Family Law, Criminal Law, Immigration Law
  Location: General Santos City, South Cotabato
  Experience: 8 years
43. Atty. Josefa Reyes
  Contact: josefa.reyes@email.com, +63 933 234 5678
  Specializations: Family Law, Labor Law, Corporate Law
  Location: Cagayan de Oro City, Misamis Oriental
  Experience: 12 years

44. Atty. Pedro Santos
  Contact: pedro.santos@email.com, +63 945 345 6789
  Specializations: Family Law, Environmental Law, Real Estate Law
  Location: Zamboanga City, Zamboanga del Sur
  Experience: 9 years

45. Atty. Maria Teresa Reyes
  Contact: maria.teresa.reyes@email.com, +63 955 456 7890
  Specializations: Family Law, Intellectual Property Law, Tax Law
  Location: Butuan City, Agusan del Norte
  Experience: 11 years

46. Atty. Gabriel Garcia
  Contact: gabriel.garcia@email.com, +63 977 567 8901
  Specializations: Family Law, Commercial Law, Employment Law
  Location: Digos City, Davao del Sur
  Experience: 7 years

47. Atty. Consuelo Santos
  Contact: consuelo.santos@email.com, +63 988 678 9012
  Specializations: Family Law, Administrative Law, Banking Law
  Location: Iligan City, Lanao del Norte
  Experience: 15 years

48. Atty. Jose Reyes
  Contact: jose.reyes@email.com, +63 933 789 0123
  Specializations: Family Law, Maritime Law, Insurance Law
  Location: Pagadian City, Zamboanga del Sur
  Experience: 13 years

49. Atty. Isabel Santos
  Contact: isabel.santos@email.com, +63 977 890 1234
  Specializations: Family Law, Constitutional Law, Immigration Law
  Location: Kidapawan City, Cotabato
  Experience: 10 years
50. Atty. Ricardo Reyes
  Contact: ricardo.reyes@email.com, +63 955 901 2345
  Specializations: Family Law, International Law, Cyber Law
  Location: Mati City, Davao Oriental
  Experience: 8 years

51. Atty. Maria Clara Garcia
  Contact: maria.clara.garcia@email.com, +63 912 345 6789
  Specializations: Family Law, Civil Law, Property Law
  Location: Dipolog City, Zamboanga del Norte
  Experience: 11 years

52. Atty. Alejandro Santos
  Contact: alejandro.santos@email.com, +63 922 123 4567
  Specializations: Family Law, Criminal Law, Immigration Law
  Location: Malaybalay City, Bukidnon
  Experience: 9 years

53. Atty. Luz Reyes
  Contact: luz.reyes@email.com, +63 933 234 5678
  Specializations: Family Law, Labor Law, Corporate Law
  Location: Koronadal City, South Cotabato
  Experience: 13 years

54. Atty. Daniel Garcia
  Contact: daniel.garcia@email.com, +63 945 345 6789
  Specializations: Family Law, Environmental Law, Real Estate Law
  Location: Tagum City, Davao del Norte
  Experience: 10 years

55. Atty. Maria Victoria Santos
  Contact: maria.victoria.santos@email.com, +63 955 456 7890
  Specializations: Family Law, Intellectual Property Law, Tax Law
  Location: Valencia City, Bukidnon
  Experience: 12 years

56. Atty. Juanito Reyes
  Contact: juanito.reyes@email.com, +63 977 567 8901
  Specializations: Family Law, Commercial Law, Employment Law
  Location: Oroquieta City, Misamis Occidental
  Experience: 8 years
57. Atty. Maria Cristina Garcia
  Contact: maria.cristina.garcia@email.com, +63 988 678 9012
  Specializations: Family Law, Administrative Law, Banking Law
  Location: Butuan City, Agusan del Norte
  Experience: 14 years

58. Atty. Josefa Santos
  Contact: josefa.santos@email.com, +63 933 789 0123
  Specializations: Family Law, Maritime Law, Insurance Law
  Location: Tandag City, Surigao del Sur
  Experience: 11 years

59. Atty. Gabriel Reyes
  Contact: gabriel.reyes@email.com, +63 977 890 1234
  Specializations: Family Law, Constitutional Law, Immigration Law
  Location: Malabang, Lanao del Sur
  Experience: 12 years

60. Atty. Luz Santos
  Contact: luz.santos@email.com, +63 955 901 2345
  Specializations: Family Law, International Law, Cyber Law
  Location: Surigao City, Surigao del Norte
  Experience: 9 years

61. Atty. Eduardo Reyes
  Contact: eduardo.reyes@email.com, +63 912 345 6789
  Specializations: Family Law, Civil Law, Property Law
  Location: Digos City, Davao del Sur
  Experience: 10 years

62. Atty. Maria Luisa Garcia
  Contact: maria.luisa.garcia@email.com, +63 922 123 4567
  Specializations: Family Law, Criminal Law, Immigration Law
  Location: Dipolog City, Zamboanga del Norte
  Experience: 8 years

63. Atty. Josefa Reyes
  Contact: josefa.reyes@email.com, +63 933 234 5678
  Specializations: Family Law, Labor Law, Corporate Law
  Location: Mati City, Davao Oriental
  Experience: 12 years
64. Atty. Pedro Santos
  Contact: pedro.santos@email.com, +63 945 345 6789
  Specializations: Family Law, Environmental Law, Real Estate Law
  Location: Kidapawan City, Cotabato
  Experience: 9 years

65. Atty. Maria Teresa Reyes
  Contact: maria.teresa.reyes@email.com, +63 955 456 7890
  Specializations: Family Law, Intellectual Property Law, Tax Law
  Location: Malaybalay City, Bukidnon
  Experience: 11 years

66. Atty. Gabriel Garcia
  Contact: gabriel.garcia@email.com, +63 977 567 8901
  Specializations: Family Law, Commercial Law, Employment Law
  Location: Koronadal City, South Cotabato
  Experience: 7 years

67. Atty. Consuelo Santos
  Contact: consuelo.santos@email.com, +63 988 678 9012
  Specializations: Family Law, Administrative Law, Banking Law
  Location: Tagum City, Davao del Norte
  Experience: 15 years

68. Atty. Jose Reyes
  Contact: jose.reyes@email.com, +63 933 789 0123
  Specializations: Family Law, Maritime Law, Insurance Law
  Location: Valencia City, Bukidnon
  Experience: 13 years

69. Atty. Isabel Santos
  Contact: isabel.santos@email.com, +63 977 890 1234
  Specializations: Family Law, Constitutional Law, Immigration Law
  Location: Oroquieta City, Misamis Occidental
  Experience: 10 years

70. Atty. Ricardo Reyes
  Contact: ricardo.reyes@email.com, +63 955 901 2345
  Specializations: Family Law, International Law, Cyber Law
  Location: Tandag City, Surigao del Sur
  Experience: 8 years
71. Atty. Maria Cristina Santos
  Contact: maria.cristina.santos@email.com, +63 912 345 6789
  Specializations: Family Law, Civil Law, Property Law
  Location: Quezon City, Metro Manila
  Experience: 11 years

72. Atty. Alejandro Reyes
  Contact: alejandro.reyes@email.com, +63 922 123 4567
  Specializations: Family Law, Criminal Law, Immigration Law
  Location: Makati City, Metro Manila
  Experience: 9 years

73. Atty. Luz Garcia
  Contact: luz.garcia@email.com, +63 933 234 5678
  Specializations: Family Law, Labor Law, Corporate Law
  Location: Pasig City, Metro Manila
  Experience: 13 years

74. Atty. Daniel Santos
  Contact: daniel.santos@email.com, +63 945 345 6789
  Specializations: Family Law, Environmental Law, Real Estate Law
  Location: Mandaluyong City, Metro Manila
  Experience: 10 years

75. Atty. Maria Victoria Reyes
  Contact: maria.victoria.reyes@email.com, +63 955 456 7890
  Specializations: Family Law, Intellectual Property Law, Tax Law
  Location: Manila City, Metro Manila
  Experience: 12 years

76. Atty. Juan Garcia
  Contact: juan.garcia@email.com, +63 977 567 8901
  Specializations: Family Law, Commercial Law, Employment Law
  Location: Caloocan City, Metro Manila
  Experience: 8 years

77. Atty. Maria Clara Santos
  Contact: maria.clara.santos@email.com, +63 988 678 9012
  Specializations: Family Law, Administrative Law, Banking Law
  Location: Pasay City, Metro Manila
  Experience: 14 years
78. Atty. Jose Reyes
  Contact: jose.reyes@email.com, +63 933 789 0123
  Specializations: Family Law, Maritime Law, Insurance Law
  Location: Taguig City, Metro Manila
  Experience: 13 years

79. Atty. Isabel Garcia
  Contact: isabel.garcia@email.com, +63 977 890 1234
  Specializations: Family Law, Constitutional Law, Immigration Law
  Location: Marikina City, Metro Manila
  Experience: 10 years

80. Atty. Ricardo Reyes
  Contact: ricardo.reyes@email.com, +63 955 901 2345
  Specializations: Family Law, International Law, Cyber Law
  Location: Malabon City, Metro Manila
  Experience: 8 years

81. Atty. Mateo Cruz
  Contact: mateo.cruz@email.com, +63 912 345 6789
  Specializations: Family Law, Civil Law, Property Law
  Location: Baguio City, Benguet
  Experience: 11 years

82. Atty. Veronica Reyes
  Contact: veronica.reyes@email.com, +63 922 123 4567
  Specializations: Family Law, Criminal Law, Immigration Law
  Location: Baguio City, Benguet
  Experience: 9 years

83. Atty. Sofia Garcia
  Contact: sofia.garcia@email.com, +63 933 234 5678
  Specializations: Family Law, Labor Law, Corporate Law
  Location: Baguio City, Benguet
  Experience: 13 years

84. Atty. Diego Santos
  Contact: diego.santos@email.com, +63 945 345 6789
  Specializations: Family Law, Environmental Law, Real Estate Law
  Location: Baguio City, Benguet
  Experience: 10 years
85. Atty. Maria Theresa Reyes
  Contact: maria.theresa.reyes@email.com, +63 955 456 7890
  Specializations: Family Law, Intellectual Property Law, Tax Law
  Location: Baguio City, Benguet
  Experience: 12 years

86. Atty. Miguel Garcia
  Contact: miguel.garcia@email.com, +63 977 567 8901
  Specializations: Family Law, Civil Law, Property Law
  Location: San Fernando City, La Union
  Experience: 8 years

87. Atty. Rosario Reyes
  Contact: rosario.reyes@email.com, +63 988 678 9012
  Specializations: Family Law, Criminal Law, Immigration Law
  Location: San Fernando City, La Union
  Experience: 14 years

88. Atty. Juanito Santos
  Contact: juanito.santos@email.com, +63 933 789 0123
  Specializations: Family Law, Labor Law, Corporate Law
  Location: San Fernando City, La Union
  Experience: 12 years

89. Atty. Clara Reyes
  Contact: clara.reyes@email.com, +63 977 890 1234
  Specializations: Family Law, Environmental Law, Real Estate Law
  Location: San Fernando City, La Union
  Experience: 9 years

90. Atty. Francisco Garcia
  Contact: francisco.garcia@email.com, +63 955 901 2345
  Specializations: Family Law, Intellectual Property Law, Tax Law
  Location: Bacnotan, La Union
  Experience: 11 years

91. Atty. Juan Dela Cruz
Contact: juan.delacruz@email.com, +63 922 123 4567
Specializations: Family Law, Criminal Law, Tribal Law
Location: Bontoc, Mountain Province
Experience: 11 years
92. Atty. Lorna Garcia
Contact: lorna.garcia@email.com, +63 933 234 5678
Specializations: Family Law, Environmental Law, Land Rights
Location: Basco, Batanes
Experience: 13 years

93. Atty. Rafael Reyes
Contact: rafael.reyes@email.com, +63 945 345 6789
Specializations: Family Law, Customary Law, Community Development
Location: Jolo, Sulu
Experience: 10 years

94. Atty. Maria Theresa Cruz
Contact: maria.theresa.cruz@email.com, +63 955 456 7890
Specializations: Family Law, Human Rights Law, Access to Justice
Location: Tawi-Tawi, Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (ARMM)
Experience: 12 years

95. Atty. Antonio Garcia
Contact: antonio.garcia@email.com, +63 977 567 8901
Specializations: Family Law, Agrarian Law, Community Disputes
Location: Sagada, Mountain Province
Experience: 8 years

96. Atty. Andrea Reyes
Contact: andrea.reyes@email.com, +63 988 678 9012
Specializations: Family Law, Indigenous Peoples' Rights, Environmental Law
Location: Kiangan, Ifugao
Experience: 14 years

97. Atty. Eduardo Santos
Contact: eduardo.santos@email.com, +63 933 789 0123
Specializations: Family Law, Land Rights, Customary Law
Location: Bataraza, Palawan
Experience: 11 years

98. Atty. Sofia Garcia
Contact: sofia.garcia@email.com, +63 977 890 1234
Specializations: Family Law, Tribal Law, Alternative Dispute Resolution
Location: Batanes, Cordillera Administrative Region (CAR)
Experience: 10 years
99. Atty. Juanita Reyes
Contact: juanita.reyes@email.com, +63 955 901 2345
Specializations: Family Law, Customary Law, Indigenous Justice Systems
Location: Lamitan, Basilan
Experience: 9 years

100. Atty. Maria Santos
Contact: maria.santos@email.com, +63 912 345 6789
Specializations: Family Law, Civil Law, Indigenous Peoples' Rights
Location: Banaue, Ifugao
Experience: 9 years

"
